
# Simulation models for BiPSim

This directory contains severale example simulation models that can be simulated with BiPSim. BiPSim needs to be installed before running any of these models. All BiPSim models have a similar structure:
 - the input directory contains the files used to describe reactants and reactions, as well as the params.in file that specifies simulation parameters.
 - the output directory contains files generated during simulation, in particular the evolution of the number of molecules over time.
 - to run a BiPSim model, navigate to the directory that contains the input and output directory, then run `bipsim input/params.in`. Often, you will find that simulation models also contain a script named "run.sh", which can also be used to run simulations automatically. Directory occasionally contain helper scripts, analysis and visualization scripts, which are not necessary to run the models.

## List and description of BiPSim models
 - guided_example: we recommend starting exploring this simple model, which builds a simplified polymerization step-by-step. This directory contains a dedicated README file to guide the interpretation of each step. An R script is also provided to help visualize the results of each simulation.
 - gene_expression: this directory contains several gene expression models for the bacterium *B. subtilis*, at various levels of granularity. Each subdirectory represents a BiPSim simulation model which includes detailed replication, transcription and translation processes. There are three levels of granularity for sequence-based processes (detailed = based-per-base polymerization, aggregated = one-step polymerization, hybrid = detailed for 5% of genes and aggregated for the remaining 95%) and three levels for metabolic processes (constant = constant level of metailed, stacked = metabolites are regenerated by stacks of 1,000 molecules, detailed = metabolites are regenerated one by one). Detailed models also contain alternative parameter files simulating the injection of tetracycline.
 - paulsson: this directory contains simplified gene expression models. Compared to the previous models, the assumption is that there is an exact 1:1:1 correspondance between genes, transcription units and proteins. This simplification allows to compare the BiPSim output with theoretical predictions.
 - tbox_leader: this model adds T-box regulation on the tyrS gene to the gene expression model.
 - gupta_benchmark: this directory contains several simulation models defined by converting 5 SBML models from the Gupta and Mendes [PMID:29938118](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29938118/) benchmark. These models are used to evaluate the performance of BiPSim’s solver.
 - n_cascades: this directory contains several simulation models for n-cascades (linear pathways of variable length) for BiPSim, COPASI, BioNetGen and NFSim. These models are used to evaluate the performance of BiPSim’s solver.
 - multifork: simplified model of multifork DNA replication.

## Other files and directories
 - run_simulations.sh: helper script to run multiple simulations at once
 - simgenerator, generate_gene_expression.py, generate_paulsson.py: custom Python scripts and classes used to generate the gene expression and paulsson models.
 - data: *B. subtilis* sequence annotations used to generate the gene expression models.
 - dev: directory containing files related to the development of BiPSim.